Improve mTLS tutorials (#2279)
kyma-project/api-gateway: docs/user/tutorials/01-10-mtls-authentication/configure-mtls-Gardener-certs.md

# Configure mTLS Authentication Using Gardener-Managed Certificates
Learn how to configure mutual TLS (mTLS) in SAP BTP, Kyma runtime using Gardener-managed Let's Encrypt server certificates and client certificates that you supply.

## Context
mTLS (mutual TLS) provides two‑way authentication: the client verifies the server's identity and the server verifies the client's identity. To enforce this authentication, the mTLS Gateway requires the following values: 
- the server private key
- the server certificate chain (server certificate plus any intermediate CAs)
- the client root CA used to validate presented client certificates. 
Each client connecting through the mTLS Gateway must have a valid client certificate and key and trust the server's root CA.

In this procedure, Gardener’s Certificate resource requests a publicly trusted server certificate from Let’s Encrypt and creates a Secret that stores the certificate and private key.

> Because Gardener manages only the server certificate and key, you must supply the client root CA and create yet another Secret storing this value. Moreover, all clients interacting with the server (Kyma workloads) must trust the server's root CA (Let's Encrypt) and have their respective client certificate chains installed. This procedure uses self-signed client certificates, but for production use, it's strongly advised to use certificates issued by a trusted CA instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Gardener manages only the server certificate and key, you must supply the client root CA and create yet another Secret storing this value. Moreover, all clients interacting with the server must trust the server's root CA (Let's Encrypt) and have their respective client certificate chains installed. This procedure uses self-signed client certificates, but for production use, it's strongly advised to use certificates issued by a trusted CA instead.
```

Maybe that should be "Istio Gateway" if specifying that here is needed?

    ```bash
    PARENT_DOMAIN="my-own-domain.example.com"
    SUBDOMAIN="mtls.${PARENT_DOMAIN}"
    GATEWAY_DOMAIN="*.${SUBDOMAIN}"
    WORKLOAD_DOMAIN="httpbin.${SUBDOMAIN}"
    ```

    Placeholder | Example domain name | Description
    ---------|----------|---------
    **PARENT_DOMAIN** | `my-own-domain.example.com` | The domain name available in the public DNS zone.
    **SUBDOMAIN** | `mtls.my-own-domain.example.com` | A subdomain created under the parent domain, specifically for the mTLS Gateway.
    **GATEWAY_DOMAIN** | `*.mtls.my-own-domain.example.com` | A wildcard domain covering all possible subdomains under the mTLS subdomain. When configuring the Gateway, this allows you to expose workloads on multiple hosts (for example, `httpbin.mtls.my-own-domain.example.com`, `test.httpbin.mtls.my-own-domain.example.com`) without creating separate Gateway rules for each one.
    **WORKLOAD_DOMAIN** | `httpbin.mtls.my-own-domain.example.com` | The specific domain assigned to your workload.

3. Create a Secret containing credentials for your DNS cloud service provider.
        

>     The information you provide to the data field differs depending on the DNS provider you're using. The DNS provider must be supported by Gardener. To learn how to configure the Secret for a specific provider, follow [External DNS Management Guidelines](https://github.com/gardener/cert-management?tab=readme-ov-file#using-commonname-and-optional-dnsnames).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    The information you provide to the data field differs depending on the DNS provider you're using. The DNS provider must be supported by Gardener. To learn how to configure the Secret for a specific provider, follow [External DNS Management Guidelines](https://github.com/gardener/external-dns-management).
```

    See an example Secret for AWS Route 53 DNS provider. **AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID** and **AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY** are base-64 encoded credentials.

    ```bash
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Secret
    metadata:
      name: aws-credentials
      namespace: test
    type: Opaque
    data:
      AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID: ...
      AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY: ...
      # Optionally, specify the region
      #AWS_REGION: {YOUR_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY
      # Optionally, specify the token
      #AWS_SESSION_TOKEN: ...
    EOF
    ```

4. Create a DNSProvider resource that references the Secret with your DNS provider's credentials.
   
   See an example Secret for AWS Route 53 DNS provider:

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: dns.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: DNSProvider
    metadata:
      name: aws
      namespace: default
    spec:
      type: aws-route53

>       ecretRef:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      secretRef:
```

        name: aws-credentials
      domains:
        include:
        - "${PARENT_DOMAIN}"
    EOF
    ```

> 5. Get the external access point of the `istio-ingressgateway` Service. The external access point is either stored in the ingress Gateway's **ip** field (for example, on GCP) or in the ingress Gateway's **hostname** field (for example, on AWS).

Author: I'll repeat the full name `istio-ingressgateway` so it's clear that we're talking about the same service

    ```bash
    LOAD_BALANCER_ADDRESS=$(kubectl get services --namespace istio-system istio-ingressgateway --output jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].ip}')
    if [[ -z $LOAD_BALANCER_ADDRESS ]]; then
        LOAD_BALANCER_ADDRESS=$(kubectl get services --namespace istio-system istio-ingressgateway --output jsonpath='{.status.loadBalancer.ingress[0].hostname}')
    fi
    ```

6. Create a DNSEntry resource.
    
    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: dns.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: DNSEntry
    metadata:
      name: dns-entry
      namespace: test
      annotations:
        dns.gardener.cloud/class: garden
    spec:
      dnsName: "${GATEWAY_DOMAIN}"
      ttl: 600
      targets:
        - "${LOAD_BALANCER_ADDRESS}"
    EOF
    ```

7. Create the server's certificate.
    

>     You use a Certificate resource to request and manage Let's Encrypt certificates from your Kyma cluster. When you create a Certificate, Gardener detects it and starts the process of issuing a certificate. One of Gardener's operators detects it and creates an ACME order with Let's Encrypt based on the domain names specified. Let's Encrypt is the default certificate issuer in Kyma. Let's Encrypt provides a challenge to prove that you own the specified domains. Once the challenge is completed successfully, Let's Encrypt issues the certificate. The issued certificate is stored it in a Kubernetes Secret, which name is specified in the Certificate's **secretName** field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    You use a Certificate CustomResource to request and manage Let's Encrypt certificates from your Kyma cluster. When you create a Certificate CR, one of Gardener's operators detects it and creates issues an [ACME](https://www.google.com/url?sa=t&source=web&rct=j&opi=89978449&url=https://letsencrypt.org/how-it-works/&ved=2ahUKEwiRhM_VrruQAxWFPxAIHbePM38QFnoECC0QAQ&usg=AOvVaw25RIWodU2kz362IWS5BbJs) request to Let's Encrypt requesting certificate for the domain names specified. Let's Encrypt is the default certificate issuer when using the Gardener provided Certificate CR. The issued certificate is stored it in a Kubernetes Secret, which name is specified in the Certificate's **secretName** field.
```

Maybe we could additionally remove some of the explanation here about the whole issuing mechanism and link to gardener docs (https://gardener.cloud/docs/extensions/others/gardener-extension-shoot-cert-service/request_cert/)?

    ```bash
    export GATEWAY_SECRET=kyma-mtls
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: cert.gardener.cloud/v1alpha1
    kind: Certificate
    metadata:
      name: domain-certificate
      namespace: "istio-system"
    spec:

>       secretName: "${GATEWAY_SECRET}"

Reviewer: The GATEWAY_SECRET value is hard coded in line 139. Having this as an env honestly had me confused of where did it suddenly come from (I'm probably blind as I did not expect this bash to do anything but create this resource 😉)
Maybe we could just put the value "kyma-mtls" everywhere instead of this var ${}? Var usage here IMHO blurs the visibility of what is actually configured

Reviewer: Or it should be an explicit step that says something like: please choose a name for this secret, and run export GATEWAY_SECRET=<yourname>

          hosts:
            - "${GATEWAY_DOMAIN}"
    EOF
    ```

11. Create a sample HTTPBin Deployment.

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: ServiceAccount
    metadata:
      name: httpbin
      namespace: test
    ---
    apiVersion: v1
    kind: Service
    metadata:
      name: httpbin
      namespace: test
      labels:
        app: httpbin
        service: httpbin
    spec:
      ports:
      - name: http
        port: 8000
        targetPort: 80
      selector:
        app: httpbin
    ---
    apiVersion: apps/v1
    kind: Deployment
    metadata:
      name: httpbin
      namespace: test
    spec:
      replicas: 1
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          app: httpbin
          version: v1
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            app: httpbin
            version: v1
        spec:
          serviceAccountName: httpbin
          containers:
          - image: docker.io/kennethreitz/httpbin
            imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
            name: httpbin
            ports:
            - containerPort: 80
    EOF
    ```

12. To expose the sample HTTPBin Deployment, create an APIRule custom resource. 

>     The APIRule must include the `X-CLIENT-SSL-CN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_SUBJECT%'`, `X-CLIENT-SSL-ISSUER: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_ISSUER%'`, and `X-CLIENT-SSL-SAN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_URI_SAN%'` headings. These headers are necessary to ensure that the backend service receives the authenticated client's identity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    We will configure the APIRule for it to append the `X-CLIENT-SSL-CN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_SUBJECT%'`, `X-CLIENT-SSL-ISSUER: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_ISSUER%'`, and `X-CLIENT-SSL-SAN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_URI_SAN%'` headers to the request. These headers will provide the upstream (your workload) with the downstream (authenticated client's) identity.
    This is optional configuration that is a very common mTLS use case.
```

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: gateway.kyma-project.io/v2
    kind: APIRule
    metadata:
      name: httpbin-mtls
      namespace: test
    spec:
      gateway: test/kyma-mtls-gateway
      hosts:
        - "${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}"
      rules:
        - methods:
            - GET
          noAuth: true
          path: /*
          timeout: 300
          request:
            headers:
              X-CLIENT-SSL-CN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_SUBJECT%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-ISSUER: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_ISSUER%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-SAN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_URI_SAN%'
      service:
        name: httpbin
        port: 8000
    EOF
    ```

13. Test the mTLS connection.
    
    1. Run the following curl command:
    
    ```bash
    curl --fail --verbose \
      --key "${CLIENT_CERT_KEY_FILE}" \
      --cert "${CLIENT_CERT_CRT_FILE}" \
      "https://${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}/headers?show_env==true"
    ```

>     If successful, you get code `200` in response. The **X-Forwarded-Client-Cert** heading contains your client certificate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    If successful, you get code `200` in response. The configured headers are also populated.
```
not sure if `X-Forwarded-Client-Cert` will always work ;)

    
    2. To thest the connection using your browser, import the client certificates into your operating system or browser. For Chrome, you can use the generated PKCS#12 file. Then, open `https://{WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}`.

### **Default Domain**

1. Create a namespace with enabled Istio sidecar proxy injection.
   
    ```bash
    kubectl create ns test
    kubectl label namespace test istio-injection=enabled --overwrite
    ```

> 2. Export the following domain names as enviroment variables. Replace `my-own-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` with the name of your domain.

Reviewer: I'm more in favour of actually giving the user a kubectl command to get the default domain. Otherwise the `my-own-domain` part is confusing with custom domain also in scope of this tutorial.

> 2. Export the following domain names as enviroment variables. Replace `my-own-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` with the name of your domain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Export the following domain names as enviroment variables. Replace `my-own-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` with the name of your domain. You might want to change the other values as well.
```

    ```bash
    PARENT_DOMAIN="my-own-domain.kyma.ondemand.com"
    SUBDOMAIN="mtls.${PARENT_DOMAIN}"
    GATEWAY_DOMAIN="*.${SUBDOMAIN}"
    WORKLOAD_DOMAIN="httpbin.${SUBDOMAIN}"
    ```

    Placeholder | Example domain name | Description
    ---------|----------|---------
    **PARENT_DOMAIN** | `my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` | The default domain of your Kyma cluster.

>     **SUBDOMAIN** | `mtls.my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` | A subdomain created under the parent domain, specifically for the mTLS Gateway. Choosing a subdomain is required if you use the default domain of your Kyma cluster, as the parent domain name is already assigned to the TLS Gateway `kyma-gateway` installed in your cluster by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    **SUBDOMAIN** | `mtls.my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` | A subdomain created under the parent domain, specifically for the mTLS Gateway. Having a separate subdomain is required if you use the default domain of your Kyma cluster, as the parent domain name is already assigned to the TLS Gateway `kyma-gateway` installed in your cluster by default.
```

    **GATEWAY_DOMAIN** | `*.mtls.my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` | A wildcard domain covering all possible subdomains under the mTLS subdomain. When configuring the Gateway, this allows you to expose workloads on multiple hosts (for example, `httpbin.mtls.my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com`, `test.httpbin.mtls.my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com`) without creating separate Gateway rules for each one.
    **WORKLOAD_DOMAIN** | `httpbin.mtls.my-default-domain.kyma.ondemand.com` | The specific domain assigned to your sample workload (HTTPBin service) in this tutorial.

> 3. Create the server's certificate.

Reviewer: Same comments follow as in the custom domain section :)

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: gateway.kyma-project.io/v2
    kind: APIRule
    metadata:
      name: httpbin-mtls
      namespace: test
    spec:
      gateway: test/kyma-mtls-gateway
      hosts:
        - "${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}"
      rules:
        - methods:
            - GET
          noAuth: true
          path: /*
          timeout: 300
          request:
            headers:
              X-CLIENT-SSL-CN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_SUBJECT%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-ISSUER: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_ISSUER%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-SAN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_URI_SAN%'
      service:
        name: httpbin
        port: 8000
    EOF
    ```

9.  Test the mTLS connection.
    
    1. Run the following curl command:
    
        ```bash
        curl --fail --verbose \
          --key "${CLIENT_CERT_KEY_FILE}" \
          --cert "${CLIENT_CERT_CRT_FILE}" \

>           "https://${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}/headers?show_env==true"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
          "https://${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}/headers?show_env=true"
```

      hosts:
        - "${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}"
      rules:
        - methods:
            - GET
          noAuth: true
          path: /*
          timeout: 300
          request:
            headers:
              X-CLIENT-SSL-CN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_SUBJECT%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-ISSUER: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_ISSUER%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-SAN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_URI_SAN%'
      service:
        name: httpbin
        port: 8000
    EOF
    ```

9.  Test the mTLS connection.
    
    1. Call the workload without providing client certificates:

        ```bash
        curl --fail --verbose "https://${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}/headers?show_env=true"
        ```
        You get cURL 56 error, which indicates a Failure with receiving network data.
    
    2. Run the following curl command, which specifies the client's certificate and public key:
    
        ```bash
        curl --fail --verbose \
          --key "${CLIENT_CERT_KEY_FILE}" \
          --cert "${CLIENT_CERT_CRT_FILE}" \
          "https://${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}/headers?show_env=true"
        ```

        If successful, you get code `200` in response. The configured headers are also populated.
    

>     3. To thest the connection using your browser, import the client certificates into your operating system or browser. For Chrome, you can use the generated PKCS#12 file. Then, open `https://{WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    3. To test the connection using your browser, import the client certificates into your operating system or browser. For Chrome, you can use the generated PKCS#12 file. Then, open `https://{WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}`.
```

> # Configure mTLS Authentication Using Gardener-Managed Certificates

Author: ```suggestion
# Configure mTLS Authentication in SAP BTP, Kyma runtime
```

> Learn how to configure mutual TLS (mTLS) in SAP BTP, Kyma runtime using Gardener-managed Let's Encrypt server certificates and client certificates that you supply.

Author: I think there's no way to hide it, Gardener's DNS external management component is responsible for requesting and managing [Let's Encrypt](https://letsencrypt.org/pl/) server certificates, and I link to their docs for more information about the process. 
their docs are open-source https://github.com/gardener/external-dns-management/blob/master/README.md
https://gardener.cloud/
we also already mention Gardener on HP, for example, here https://help.sap.com/docs/btp/sap-business-technology-platform-internal/kyma-security-guide?locale=en-US&state=DRAFT&version=Internal&q=gardener#cloud-infrastructure

- Client certificates are self-signed. For production use, it's advised to use certificates issued by a trusted CA instead.

For setting up an mTLS Gateway, you can either use your custom domain or the default domain of your Kyma cluster.

## Prerequisites

- You have a SAP BTP, Kyma runtime instance with Istio and API Gateway modules added. The Istio and API Gateway modules are added to your Kyma cluster by default.
- For setting up the mTLS Gateway, you must prepare the domain name available in the public DNS zone. You can use one of the following approaches:

  - Use your custom domain.
    
    To use a custom domain, you must own the DNS zone and supply credentials for a provider supported by Gardener so the ACME DNS challenge can be completed. For this, you must first register this DNS provider in your Kyma runtime cluster and create a DNS entry resource.

  - Use the default domain of your Kyma cluster.
    

>     When you create a SAP BTP, Kyma runtime instance, your cluster receives a default wildcard domain that provides the endpoint for the Kubernetes API server. This is the primary access point for all cluster management operations, used by kubectl and other tools.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    When you create an SAP BTP, Kyma runtime instance, your cluster receives a default wildcard domain that provides the endpoint for the Kubernetes API server. This is the primary access point for all cluster management operations, used by kubectl and other tools.
```

        ``` 

    3. Sign the client's certificate.

        ```bash
        openssl x509 -req -days 365 -CA "${CLIENT_ROOT_CA_CRT_FILE}" -CAkey "${CLIENT_ROOT_CA_KEY_FILE}" -set_serial 0 -in "${CLIENT_CERT_CSR_FILE}" -out "${CLIENT_CERT_CRT_FILE}"  
        ``` 

5.  Create a Secret with Client CA Cert for mTLS Gateway. For more information on the convention that the Secret must use, see [Key Convention](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/secure-ingress/#key-formats).

    ```bash
    kubectl create secret generic -n istio-system "kyma-mtls-cacert" --from-file=cacert="${CLIENT_ROOT_CA_CRT_FILE}"
    ```

6.  Create an mTLS Gateway.
 
    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: networking.istio.io/v1alpha3
    kind: Gateway
    metadata:
      name: kyma-mtls-gateway
      namespace: test
    spec:
      selector:
        app: istio-ingressgateway
        istio: ingressgateway
      servers:
        - port:
            number: 443
            name: mtls
            protocol: HTTPS
          tls:
            mode: MUTUAL
            credentialName: kyma-mtls
          hosts:
            - "${GATEWAY_DOMAIN}"
    EOF
    ```

> 11. To expose your workload, create an APIRule custom resource.

Reviewer 2: this might be step 7, not 11. Not entirely sure, but I believe the md jumps from step 6 to 11 etc.

Author: yes, you're right
thank you :)

    metadata:
      name: httpbin
      namespace: test
    spec:
      replicas: 1
      selector:
        matchLabels:
          app: httpbin
          version: v1
      template:
        metadata:
          labels:
            app: httpbin
            version: v1
        spec:
          serviceAccountName: httpbin
          containers:
          - image: docker.io/kennethreitz/httpbin
            imagePullPolicy: IfNotPresent
            name: httpbin
            ports:
            - containerPort: 80
    EOF
    ```

    ```bash
    cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
    apiVersion: gateway.kyma-project.io/v2
    kind: APIRule
    metadata:
      name: httpbin-mtls
      namespace: test
    spec:
      gateway: test/kyma-mtls-gateway
      hosts:
        - "${WORKLOAD_DOMAIN}"
      rules:
        - methods:
            - GET
          noAuth: true
          path: /*
          timeout: 300
          request:
            headers:
              X-CLIENT-SSL-CN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_SUBJECT%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-ISSUER: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_ISSUER%'
              X-CLIENT-SSL-SAN: '%DOWNSTREAM_PEER_URI_SAN%'
      service:
        name: httpbin
        port: 8000
    EOF
    ```

> 12. Test the mTLS connection.

Reviewer 2: probably step 8
